---
layout: post
title:  "My Experiences in Working Remotely"
author: Oskar Wickstr√∂m
date: 2020-03-12
categories: general
tags: ["remote", "work", "technology"]
---

As I'm writing this, COVID-19 is spreading across the world. A lot of
companies have partly or fully shut down their offices, and have
people work from their homes. Others might self-isolate by choice. In
any case, you might now find yourself in a situation where your team
is suddenly a remote-working team.

I've been working remotely for the last 3 years. It's been a great
privilege and pleasure, but not without its issues. There's a bunch of
challenges that I've gone through, and I'm very much still learning.

In this post I'll focus on _my personal experiences_. I won't go into
tips on everyday routines, tooling, or how you might introduce remote
work into your organization. I don't have any simple advice, but
hopefully this post will give you some inspiration and useful
considerations when setting out on your remote work journey.

## Why Remote

First, I'm an introvert with a limited capacity for social
interaction. I love hanging out with people, and I consider myself
socially competent, whatever that means. But social interaction drains
me quickly. The work I do requires a lot of focus. There are
definitely social elements that require face-to-face interaction, too,
but the majority is thinking, communicating, designing, and the
occasional pressing of buttons.

Remote work is thus a huge enabler for prolonged focus and
productivity in my life. Working from home, I'm able to get into the
zone. This is something that never happens in a big open-plan
office. I may get work done, but I'm not nearly as focused as when I'm
alone.

Working remotely also supports the way of life I prefer. There's a
myriad of possibilities opening up when you go remote. However, I'll
save those for another day. Check out [Chris Herd's twitter
account](https://twitter.com/chris_herd) for more inspiration.

You might be in a remote-working situation for other reasons, perhaps
because of COVID-19. It might be temporary, something you get through,
and long back for normal co-located work. Whatever your situation, if
you are working remotely, why not make the best of it?

## Asynchronous Communication

As mentioned before, a big part of my productivity is being able to
focus. This means no interruptions. It doesn't, however, mean no
_communication_. Communication is key in my work. It's not only about
organization and scheduling, but also communicating ideas and design,
giving feedback on documents, and reviewing code. For this to work
without interruptions, the teams needs to adopt _asynchronous_
communication. Everyone communicates when they have time, like before
or after breaks, and doesn't expect immediate replies.

![[This Is Why You Shouldn't Interrupt a
Programmer](https://heeris.id.au/2013/this-is-why-you-shouldnt-interrupt-a-programmer/)</br>
&copy; Jason Heeris 2013 [CC-BY-NC-ND](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.5/se/)
](/assets/interrupt-programmer.png)

In the best case, synchronous communication requires a lot of, well,
synchronization. You have to agree on times for conference calls or
mob programming sessions, and if it's co-located, agree on where to
meet. In the worst case, it's plain interruption.

Reconfiguring yourself and your team from synchronous to asynchronous
communication structures can be challenging. You'll need to work with
this actively, constantly nudging each other in the right
direction. You might need to get comfortable with new tools, improve
your writing skills, and be more careful in how you express yourself
and interpret others. I tend to read in too much of a serious tone in
written communication, thinking that people are discontent or
otherwise unhappy. Written communication is hard.

## Keeping Focused

After having been able to work remotely for a few years, I've learned
some things about myself. In my spare time, I'm always working on
something that I consider productive. When work is motivating it feels
very similar, and I generally have little trouble keeping
focused.

Thus, I've been searching for what really motivates me. It's not
Haskell, functional programming, or any other technology. It's not
about things being hard or complex, or colleagues being smart or
having brilliant academic or industry track records.

For me, it's mainly working with respectful and inspiring colleagues
on a shared vision, and achieving observable results. Working on
products that'll inspire and help others in their work or daily
life. Things that fit with my views on politics and society. For you,
it might be something completely different.

The worst experiences I've had, remote or on-site, have been either
toy projects that would never see any real use, or projects with toxic
management. Those projects have often been very interesting in terms
of technology, but to no avail.

## Distance in Time and Space

...

## The Amplifier

One important thing about remote work that I've learned is that it
works as an amplifier. In good projects, working part or full-time
remote has been amplifying the good aspects of the project, rendering
it even better. A good day of working remote is often way better than
a good day in the office. Conversely, on bad projects, remote work
makes everything ten times worse. And on a bad day working remotely,
you're all alone in the void. You have no comfort, no colleagues to
lean on. Sure, you can lean on people over the Internet, but it's not
quite the same as seeing someone eye-to-eye when you're down.  Some
bad projects I've been in, being on-site and having colleagues to lean
on has been my safety net.

To summarize, if you're anything like me, and if you're going to work
remotely, carefully pick your projects and teams. Both the risk and
the reward are amplified. Talk with your colleagues and management
about remote work when doing retrospectives or whatever. It might be
worth investing some extra effort in the beginning if you're trying to
introduce remote work in an organization that's not familiar with it,
to gain the trust required. Over time, I hope you'll hammer in the
fact that remote works!
